---
title: "Banning social media for teens won't help anyone"
date: 2023-03-26
summary: >
  And other explanations of how good intentions are impossible for the 
  internet age
image: /images/sad-sparklebutt.jpg
---

Utah recently passed a bill that [limits children's access to social
media](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-65060733), and I think
this is a profoundly bad idea with a theoretically sound premise that
is just unworkable in the modern internet era. Of course though, the
preceding generations that don't understand the brave new world we
have created don't realize this. And in the meantime kids will just
suffer.

What happens when the kid is queer and the parents are hateful? What
happens with people like me?

I'm such a queer kid that grew up in a conservative household (in
Seattle no less, I don't get it either). When I was in middle school,
I started to question my gender and then my parents found out on
accident. I was confronted and I had no time to prepare for this.

Of course I failed, and then my parents managed to find my support
group via a group text message line (if you remember those, please get
a colonoscopy this year) and I was wholly and irreversibly cut off
from the people who were trying to help me. Then that desire to really
know myself got shoved back into the closet deep, and it nearly stayed
there.

Without that resource of people to talk with, I was lost. I was truly
alone and had nobody to talk out my gender issues with. My parents
couldn't understand my form of existence, and with them shutting me
down as much as they did, I eventually decided to not talk with them
anymore.

I managed to transition anyways in spite of that, but it took valuable
time that would have made me get an aesthetically better result if I
had started earlier.

I fear that this law in Utah will lead to people like me being harmed
by not having anyone to really look up to for advice about the abormal
feelings they're having.

Traditionally, the queer community has had to restart itself every
generation because of how much it is villified and shut down by the
constabulary. Millenials are one of the first generations to be able
to get queer advice from the generation before them. Gen Z has grown
up with the expectation that this would be continued for the next
generations and has been working to create better spaces.

There is no good solution for this. The people in power can't
understand queer desires to be authentic about themselves, so they
fall back on trying to shut down any attempt at expressing
individuality, like was done to them. If anything, you can view this
level of desire to control kids as a trauma response to a changing
world that is leaving them behind.

At the same time though, the internet really is dangerous for kids.
You don't really know who anyone is. People being anonymous combined
with a very very small percentage of people who _actually want to
cause harm_ (probably 0.01% at most) mean that for many kids it's
probably not safe to be dumped onto the internet wholesale. My parents
had a web filter that attempted to protect me against all of the
horrors of the internet (I worked around if with Tor, this ended up
causing me to learn everything that I know about networking), mostly
because there are horrors on the internet like 4chan where it wasn't
abnormal to witness beheadings for a while.

Kids in queer spaces have been a liability for a long time, but mostly
a social one. Kids aren't always the most composed and emotionally
mature, which can cause conflict. It's frustrating that it's now
becoming a _legal liability_, not just a moderation liability. I've
had to have the conversation with a kid's parents about discovering
_real_ child grooming more times than my therapist is comfortable with
(bless her heart).

This law is not going to protect kids from social media communities.
It's just going to teach them to use VPNs. This law will rip people
away from communities that actually support them when their parents
won't. This law will just cut Utah off the internet as a whole because
it's going to just make trying to serve anyone there who might be a
kid a legal and logistical clusterfuck.

I wouldn't be surprised if such cutoffs from social media companies
will just result in more pain and agony, the same kind of pain and
agony they are trying to prevent with the law.

But, then again, the cruelty is the point, isn't it? Why should kids
have a mind of their own and agency when it is so much simpler to just
view them as property that can't control anything for themselves?

Or is the queer community just going to move to LinkedIn because there
seems to be an explicit carve-out for LinkedIn?

I don't talk to my parents much anymore. It's enough that they're
worried, but I find it's easier for my mental health to just mark
their messages as read and move on with my life than trying to deal
with that tightly wound ball of trauma. This shit probably won't go
away until they're dead.

Maybe even after. Trauma is a bitch.
